DESIGN.md, before:

# Python Learning Platform - Design Document

## Overview

This document outlines the design decisions and requirements for a web-based Python learning platform designed specifically for upper primary students. The platform uses an innovative "worksheet" approach with carefully balanced problem difficulty levels.

## Educational Philosophy

### Core Innovation: Worksheet-Based Learning
- **Problem Distribution**: Each worksheet contains ~20 problems across three difficulty levels:
  - 30% Easy - Building confidence and basic understanding
  - 30% Medium - Reinforcing concepts with moderate challenge  
  - 30% Hard - Stretching students' abilities and problem-solving skills

### Differentiation from Traditional Courses
- **Multiple Practice Opportunities**: Unlike traditional courses with single concept repetition
- **Non-Linear Learning**: Students can work on different difficulty levels within the same worksheet
- **Always Accessible**: Students always have problems they can solve, preventing frustration
- **Immediate Results**: Students always run working code, never spend entire lessons stuck

## Learning Progression

The curriculum follows a carefully designed progression where Worksheets 1-4 focus exclusively on numerical programming without string complexity, allowing students to build solid fundamentals while creating engaging interactive programs. Only after mastering core concepts do students encounter strings in Worksheet 5, introduced in a simplified manner that avoids common pitfalls and unnecessary complexity. For detailed descriptions of each worksheet, see [WORKSHEETS.md](WORKSHEETS.md).

## Problem Types

Each worksheet incorporates three main exercise types:

1. **Observation Exercises** - "Run this program and observe the output"
   - Students learn by seeing code in action
   - Builds understanding of program behavior

2. **Modification Exercises** - "Edit this program to do something different"
   - Students practice code modification
   - Reinforces understanding through active engagement

3. **Creation Exercises** - "Write a program to do something"
   - Students apply learned concepts independently
   - Develops problem-solving and coding skills

## User Interface Design

### Current Interface (from screenshot)
- Clean design with white main content and light blue/purple sidebar
- Each problem has:
  - Problem description and task
  - "Your Task" box with specific instructions
  - Code editor with dark theme
  - Hint and Run Code buttons
  - Output area with feedback
  - Success/error feedback boxes

### Input Design Requirements for Worksheet 2

**Problem**: Command line input is intimidating for upper primary students

**Solution**: Textbox-based input system

**Implementation Approach**:
- Input requirements specified as part of each problem configuration
- Dynamic input field creation based on problem needs
- Progressive complexity: single input → multiple inputs → mixed types

**Example Problem Structure**:
```
Problem: Let's add two numbers together!

Inputs:
First number: [textbox]
Second number: [textbox]

Code:
# Get the first number from box 'a'
num1 = get_input('a')

# Get the second number from box 'b'
num2 = get_input('b')

# Now use the variables you created
result = num1 + num2
print(result)

Task: Enter two numbers and run the code to see their sum.
```

**Benefits**:
- Visual and intuitive for young students
- No command line fear
- Immediate feedback on input
- Easy to modify and re-run
- Feels like using real applications

## Technical Requirements

### Core Features
- Python code execution in browser (Pyodide)
- Real-time code validation and feedback
- Input/output handling for interactive programs
- Progress tracking across worksheets
- Responsive design for different screen sizes

### Input System Implementation
- Dynamic input field generation based on problem configuration
- Input validation and type checking
- Seamless integration with code execution
- Support for different input types (numbers, text, etc.)

### Validation System
- Pattern matching for code requirements
- Output validation
- Error handling and user-friendly messages
- Progressive difficulty validation rules

## Success Metrics

### Educational Goals
- All students make meaningful progress in each session
- Students build confidence through incremental success
- Immediate feedback and visible results
- Fun and engaging learning experience

### Technical Goals
- Fast, reliable code execution
- Intuitive user interface
- Robust error handling
- Scalable problem creation system

## Input System Implementation

### Overview
The input system has been implemented for Worksheet 2, allowing students to interact with Python programs through textbox inputs instead of command-line input.

### The `get_input()` Function Approach
Instead of automatically injecting variables into the Python environment, students use an explicit `get_input()` function to retrieve values from input fields. This approach:

- **Makes the connection explicit**: Students actively call `get_input('input_name')` to get values
- **Teaches function concepts**: Introduces the idea of calling functions to get data
- **Eliminates "magic"**: No mysterious variables appearing out of nowhere
- **Reinforces variable assignment**: Students must assign the result to their own variables

### Example Usage
```python
# Get a number from the input box labeled 'first_number'
user_number = get_input('first_number')
print(user_number)

# Get two numbers and add them
num1 = get_input('a')
num2 = get_input('b')
result = num1 + num2
print(result)
```

### Key Features
- **Textbox-based Input**: Students use familiar form inputs instead of command-line
- **Type Support**: Number and text input types with automatic validation
- **Explicit Input Function**: Students use `get_input()` function to actively retrieve values
- **Progressive Complexity**: Starts with simple inputs, builds to complex interactions

### Technical Implementation
- Dynamic input field generation based on problem configuration
- Input validation and type conversion (number/text)
- Seamless integration with Pyodide Python environment
- Moved Run Code button below input fields for better UX flow

### Educational Benefits
- Eliminates command-line fear for young students
- Provides immediate visual feedback on inputs
- Teaches variable concepts through practical examples with explicit `get_input()` function
- Makes the connection between UI inputs and Python variables clear and intentional
- Supports both input and non-input problems in same worksheet

## Next Steps

1. **Create Additional Worksheets**: Develop Worksheets 3-5 following the established progression
2. **Enhance Validation**: Build comprehensive validation for different problem types
3. **User Testing**: Test with target age group to validate design decisions
4. **Iterate and Improve**: Refine based on student feedback and performance

Commit message:

Refactor get_input() system: extract shared logic and eliminate code duplication
- Created input-system.js shared module with createGetInputFunction() and setupGetInputFunction()
- Updated worksheet.js to use shared InputSystem.setupGetInputFunction()
- Refactored test-input-system.js to test real production code instead of duplicates
- Added test for setupGetInputFunction() to ensure Pyodide integration works
- Updated worksheet.html to include input-system.js script
- Enhanced get_input() to support no-argument calls for single inputs
- Updated worksheet-2.json problems to use simplified get_input() syntax
- Updated DESIGN.md with new functionality documentation
- All tests now verify actual production implementation
- Eliminated 30+ lines of duplicate code
- Improved maintainability with single source of truth

DESIGN.md, after:

# Python Learning Platform - Design Document

## Overview

This document outlines the design decisions and requirements for a web-based Python learning platform designed specifically for upper primary students. The platform uses an innovative "worksheet" approach with carefully balanced problem difficulty levels.

## Educational Philosophy

### Core Innovation: Worksheet-Based Learning
- **Problem Distribution**: Each worksheet contains ~20 problems across three difficulty levels:
  - 30% Easy - Building confidence and basic understanding
  - 30% Medium - Reinforcing concepts with moderate challenge  
  - 30% Hard - Stretching students' abilities and problem-solving skills

### Differentiation from Traditional Courses
- **Multiple Practice Opportunities**: Unlike traditional courses with single concept repetition
- **Non-Linear Learning**: Students can work on different difficulty levels within the same worksheet
- **Always Accessible**: Students always have problems they can solve, preventing frustration
- **Immediate Results**: Students always run working code, never spend entire lessons stuck

## Learning Progression

The curriculum follows a carefully designed progression where Worksheets 1-4 focus exclusively on numerical programming without string complexity, allowing students to build solid fundamentals while creating engaging interactive programs. Only after mastering core concepts do students encounter strings in Worksheet 5, introduced in a simplified manner that avoids common pitfalls and unnecessary complexity. For detailed descriptions of each worksheet, see [WORKSHEETS.md](WORKSHEETS.md).

## Problem Types

Each worksheet incorporates three main exercise types:

1. **Observation Exercises** - "Run this program and observe the output"
   - Students learn by seeing code in action
   - Builds understanding of program behavior

2. **Modification Exercises** - "Edit this program to do something different"
   - Students practice code modification
   - Reinforces understanding through active engagement

3. **Creation Exercises** - "Write a program to do something"
   - Students apply learned concepts independently
   - Develops problem-solving and coding skills

## User Interface Design

### Current Interface (from screenshot)
- Clean design with white main content and light blue/purple sidebar
- Each problem has:
  - Problem description and task
  - "Your Task" box with specific instructions
  - Code editor with dark theme
  - Hint and Run Code buttons
  - Output area with feedback
  - Success/error feedback boxes

### Input Design Requirements for Worksheet 2

**Problem**: Command line input is intimidating for upper primary students

**Solution**: Textbox-based input system

**Implementation Approach**:
- Input requirements specified as part of each problem configuration
- Dynamic input field creation based on problem needs
- Progressive complexity: single input → multiple inputs → mixed types

**Example Problem Structure**:
```
Problem: Let's add two numbers together!

Inputs:
First number: [textbox]
Second number: [textbox]

Code:
# Get the first number from box 'a'
num1 = get_input('a')

# Get the second number from box 'b'
num2 = get_input('b')

# Now use the variables you created
result = num1 + num2
print(result)

Task: Enter two numbers and run the code to see their sum.
```

**Benefits**:
- Visual and intuitive for young students
- No command line fear
- Immediate feedback on input
- Easy to modify and re-run
- Feels like using real applications

## Technical Requirements

### Core Features
- Python code execution in browser (Pyodide)
- Real-time code validation and feedback
- Input/output handling for interactive programs
- Progress tracking across worksheets
- Responsive design for different screen sizes

### Input System Implementation
- Dynamic input field generation based on problem configuration
- Input validation and type checking
- Seamless integration with code execution
- Support for different input types (numbers, text, etc.)

### Validation System
- Pattern matching for code requirements
- Output validation
- Error handling and user-friendly messages
- Progressive difficulty validation rules

## Success Metrics

### Educational Goals
- All students make meaningful progress in each session
- Students build confidence through incremental success
- Immediate feedback and visible results
- Fun and engaging learning experience

### Technical Goals
- Fast, reliable code execution
- Intuitive user interface
- Robust error handling
- Scalable problem creation system

## Input System Implementation

### Overview
The input system has been implemented for Worksheet 2, allowing students to interact with Python programs through textbox inputs instead of command-line input.

### The `get_input()` Function Approach
Instead of automatically injecting variables into the Python environment, students use an explicit `get_input()` function to retrieve values from input fields. This approach:

- **Makes the connection explicit**: Students actively call `get_input('input_name')` to get values
- **Teaches function concepts**: Introduces the idea of calling functions to get data
- **Eliminates "magic"**: No mysterious variables appearing out of nowhere
- **Reinforces variable assignment**: Students must assign the result to their own variables

### Example Usage
```python
# Get a number from the input box labeled 'first_number'
user_number = get_input('first_number')
print(user_number)

# Get two numbers and add them
num1 = get_input('a')
num2 = get_input('b')
result = num1 + num2
print(result)

# For single-input problems, you can call get_input() without arguments
# This returns the value of the first (and only) input field
temperature = get_input()  # No string literal needed!
print(temperature)
```

### Key Features
- **Textbox-based Input**: Students use familiar form inputs instead of command-line
- **Type Support**: Number and text input types with automatic validation
- **Explicit Input Function**: Students use `get_input()` function to actively retrieve values
- **Progressive Complexity**: Starts with simple inputs, builds to complex interactions
- **Simplified Single Input**: For single-input problems, `get_input()` can be called without arguments to avoid string literals

### Technical Implementation
- Dynamic input field generation based on problem configuration
- Input validation and type conversion (number/text)
- Seamless integration with Pyodide Python environment
- Moved Run Code button below input fields for better UX flow

### Educational Benefits
- Eliminates command-line fear for young students
- Provides immediate visual feedback on inputs
- Teaches variable concepts through practical examples with explicit `get_input()` function
- Makes the connection between UI inputs and Python variables clear and intentional
- Supports both input and non-input problems in same worksheet

## Next Steps

1. **Create Additional Worksheets**: Develop Worksheets 3-5 following the established progression
2. **Enhance Validation**: Build comprehensive validation for different problem types
3. **User Testing**: Test with target age group to validate design decisions
4. **Iterate and Improve**: Refine based on student feedback and performance
